# Data Pipelines with Apache Airflow

## Introduction
A music streaming company, Sparkify, has decided that it is time to introduce more automation and monitoring to their data warehouse ETL pipelines. This project would involve creating high grade data pipelines that are dynamic and built from reusable tasks, can be monitored, and allow easy backfills. It also involves running tests against their datasets after the ETL steps have been executed to catch any discrepancies in the datasets.


## Purpose
The project will allow more automation and monitoring to their data warehouse ETL pipelines.

## Data
The source data resides in S3 and needs to be processed in Sparkify's data warehouse in Amazon Redshift. The source datasets consist of JSON logs that tell about user activity in the application and JSON metadata about the songs the users listen to.

```bash
Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
```
### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```bash
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```bash
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```bash
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

## Schema Design and ETL Pipeline
The schema design is a star schema with facts and dimension table.
Star scheme enables the company query song & user data with faster reads and less complex SQL query. 

The fact table contains quantitative measure containing measurements, metrics and facts of the data while dimension table contains descriptive attributes to be used as query constraining.
Fact Table: songplays
Dimension Tables: users, songs, artists and time.

## Building Operators

The following operators were defined to enable completion of the DAG task

### Stage Operator
The stage operator loads any JSON formatted files from S3 to Amazon Redshift. The operator creates and runs a SQL COPY statement based on the parameters provided. The operator's parameters specifies where in S3 the file is loaded and what is the target table. 
he parameters is used to distinguish between JSON file. Another important requirement of the stage operator is containing a templated field that allows it to load timestamped files from S3 based on the execution time and run backfills

### Fact and Dimension Operators
With dimension and fact operators, there are SQL helper class to run data transformations. Most of the logic is within the SQL transformations and the operator takes as input a SQL statement and target database on which to run the query against. One can also define a target table that will contain the results of the transformation.

Dimension loads are often done with the truncate-insert pattern where the target table is emptied before the load. Thus, there could also have a parameter that allows switching between insert modes when loading dimensions. Fact tables are usually so massive that they should only allow append type functionality

## Data Quality Operator
The data quality operator is used to run checks on the data itself. The operator's main functionality is to receive one or more SQL based test cases along with the expected results and execute the tests. For each the test, the test result and expected result is checked and if there is no match, the operator raises an exception and the task should retry and fail eventually.

For example one test could be a SQL statement that checks if certain column contains NULL values by counting all the rows that have NULL in the column. We do not want to have any NULLs so expected result would be 0 and the test would compare the SQL statement's outcome to the expected result


